---
layout: post
title:  "Is Catan a game of luck?"
date:   2020-07-26 17:19:03 +1000
categories: misc
---

I don't even remember why I bought a board game or why I chose Catan but it holds a special place in my heart as the first board game I ever bought for myself. I've played a lot of other board games since then but Catan one of those games that I always find myself going back to! A decent online Catan platform called Colonist.io has popped up recently and playing some more competitive games with my friends has really inspired me to read more strategy and reflect on why some of my friends enjoy it and some don't.

# A game of luck or a game of skill?

The most common complaint that I hear about the game is that there is too much luck involved. I've always accepted that there is a luck element involved in the game but I don't agree that there is too much - there's a reason that some of my friends never win and others win a lot. From my experiences the players that don't enjoy the game generally do one of two things:
- they don't put their starting settlements in good spots 
- they don't trade during the game

It makes sense from this perspective because without these you're really at the complete mercy of the dice rolls. I've definitely found myself in games where I'm in a really bad position and it feels like a chore to play because I took a risk that flopped and I have no real chance of winning unless I get perfect dice rolls. The important thing is know how to both secure yourself a strong position and take the initiative to trade so that you're not relying on luck to win. I watched some commentary from a pro player who thought that with perfect play the luck factor is about 20% which I agree with. I'll accept that there are some players that don't want to strategize and think about how to secure a stronger position, but for those that are even a little interested, here are some tips:

## Beginner tips:
- Are there better spots with more dots? 11-13 dots is ideal
- Do you have any tiles with 6 or 8? these will usually get rolled the most often after 7
- No wheat means defeat - you need it for everything except roads
- Wood and brick are useless unless you have both
- Can you build to a port at some point in the game?
- Try to aim for either longest road or largest army

## Intermediate tips:
- You don't need every resource - Ore / Wheat / Sheep is a popular strategy
- There are only 3 brick 3 ore tiles - if you want to secure good numbers on either resource, plan ahead
- Don't get longest road early - it's easy to take from you and you'll get targeted
- Do you have a variety of numbers? if you're stacking up on numbers you're more reliant on dice rolls
- Look at the entire board and think about which resources are scarce 
- Adapt your strategy to what position you are in - 4th player may not access to a resource if it's scarce
- Before you place your first settlement, consider what options you will likely have for your second settlement


## Advanced tips:
- Can you place a settlement to lock the players after you out of a resource entirely?
- There's no point securing yourself strong setup if it means other players have a better setup
- Look at what resources other players will aim for with their second settlement - consider placing defensively to block the spots they will want to place on 
- If you're 4th position avoid placing on the coast because this will give the other players more options for their second settlement
- Think about who will want to trade with you and what resources they will have too much of
- Consider the likelihood that a tile will be blocked during the game
