---
layout: post
title:  "How do I structure my Flutter code?"
date:   2020-08-23 17:19:03 +1000
categories: learning cs
---

This is Part 4 of my posts about learning Flutter. Click here for [Part 1](https://andyluu.com/learning/cs/2020/07/19/flutter.html), [Part 2](https://andyluu.com/learning/cs/2020/08/10/flutter2.html) and [Part 3](https://andyluu.com/learning/cs/2020/08/16/flutter3.html).

With the notifications and settings functionality finished, I wanted to do some cleanup of my code as well as deciding whether I wanted to implement any more features. Up to this point, I wrote all my code in one big Dart file, and while that made everything work smoothly - I felt pretty bad about my very long and very disorganised code. How do I structure my code? How do you know what deserves it's own seperate file? What's the correct way to refactor my code? They're questions that have been on my mind for a while, but I've never had to chance to tackle because I've never written code at this scale before.

There doesn't seem to be a single correct answer to those questions. Feedback from my friends include:
- Get it working first and then refactor
- Follow your intuition
- Split out when the existing file gets too big / annoying to navigate
- Avoid creating classes where possible
- Delete as much code as possible to achieve a simpler / more concise way to write something
- Trial and error

I'm definitely on the get it working first and then refactor later boat, and I think that it's something that I'll just improve at as I write more code and become more experienced. The process I ended up going through was:

1. Split the files by functionality. I had a separate file for each 'page' of my app, a file for the notification functionality, and a file for parsing the API call. If I had to take it any further, I'd split the frontend and backend code as well, but for a project of this size I think it's fine as is. 

2. Refactor all my global mutable variables. The majority of these were simple but it was complicated by the requirement for the callbackDispatcher function of the notifications package to be a top-level function and my very clunky implementation of displaying a text forecast. 

3. Simplify my code. Went through and simplified the egregious code at first. Also showed my code to a friend who pointed out a few opportunities for improvement. He also pointed out some code that is probably good enough for a project of this scale, but really should be written another way. I think its good to get in the habit of writing that higher quality code even if it technically doesn't matter.

It's already a lot better than it used to be, but I think there's still room for improvement. I'm going to take it to a state that I'm happy with and then call this project closed.