---
layout: post
title:  "What programming language should I learn first?"
date:   2020-07-05 17:19:03 +1000
categories: learning cs
---

*What programming language should I learn first?* is probably one of the first questions that pops in the head of every person thinking about learning how to code. I've been asked this very question from a few friends that I've discussed learning how to code with, and my answer is usually **Python**. It's not the first language I learned and I would still consider myself a beginner at Python, but as someone who sat on the sidelines thinking about learning how to code for years I'm happy to make that recommendation for three main reasons:

  1. An easy learning curve
  2. Really simple and readable syntax
  3. A huge amount of free online resources

Of course there's more to consider when choosing a language, but for the average person thinking about learning how to code I think they would have the best success with Python for these reasons.

## A case for C?
Despite what I said above, I was so impressed by the CS50: Introduction to Computer Science course at Harvard that I've actually started linking [the introductory lecture](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jjqgP9dpD1k) to friends who express an interest in learning how to code. It might seem overkill to give someone with slight interest an hour long lecture to watch, but it's such a great explanation of the basics of computer science that most people could follow.

The course actually starts with some brief exposure to the visual programming language Scratch (which is great for anyone completely new to programming) but starts teaching C for anyone who was able to make it past the introductory lecture. This was probably the most contentious part of the course while I was completing it, but now a few months later I can appreciate how this choice allowed the course to teach fundamental computer science comments like machine code / assembly / compilers / memory / pointers that I have not encountered in any other course.

The course does a great job of supporting this with the lectures, IDE, automatic grader and even Python towards the end of the course, but I could see this being a challenge for some people. I'd definitely recommend the course early in someone's study journey but ideally after an initial foray into Python.

## What about Java?
I've actually decided recently that I want to put more effort into learning Java compared to Python, but I still wouldn't recommend it as someone's first programming language over Python. I remember my first impressions of Java being:
- *Why is it so much harder to write than Python?*
- *Why do I have to type System.out.println instead of print?*
- *What on earth is private, static and void?*

These were questions I asked as someone familiar with Python, so I can imagine how confusing it would be for someone new to programming. As with any other language though, the weird syntax makes sense as you get more familiar with Java and can appreciate the advantages of explicitly declaring everything.

Ultimately I decided to focus on Java because the general online consensus was that there were more opportunities for Java programmers, but I will continue learning Python because how fast it can be written can make it invaluable for writing code during interviews.
