---
layout: post
title:  "What makes Hades so fun?"
date:   2020-09-27 17:19:03 +1000
categories: gaming
---

I had a craving for an RPG the other day - it's a feeling that creeps up on me every now and then. Part of it might be the fact that I grew up playing MMORPGs like Runescape and World of Warcraft, but I love the feeling of investing time and effort into something to get better and stronger in the future. However you only need a short visit to /r/MMORPG to know that the playerbase hasn't been impressed with recent releases and it's near impossible to dislodge even a 16-year old World of Warcraft. Instead I picked Hades, a roguelike action RPG which had just released that morning to extremely positive reviews. Almost two weeks later, I've sunk about 30 hours into it and I can say that it's easily one of my favourite games in recent times. What makes Hades so fun? I think it's because Hades is an evolution of the roguelike genre that blends amazingly well with both action elements and RPG elements.

1. An evolution of the roguelike genre

It might be surprising that I picked up a roguelike game to fill my craving for an RPG, considering the whole genre is about permadeath, but they've always offered some sort of system outside the usual gameplay loop for the player to feel like they're still progressing - getting closer to that coveted finish. Games like Binding of Isaac and Enter the Gungeon achieved that by having unlockables for the player to earn, but it always felt like the biggest source of progress was simply getting better at reading attack patterns and remembering which items were good.

There are multiple systems that make you stronger over time, alongside a system that rewards you for increasing the game's difficulty - and a really high level of customisation in both. The game does an amazing job at smoothing out the difficulty curve that is notorious in roguelikes.

2. Action elements

It's still very beneficial to know the attack patterns of enemies (especially bosses) but there is a much smaller reliance on being good at bullet hells. Not only are bullet hell situations less prevalent, the game gives you many more tools for dealing with such situations through things like dodging, deflecting and blocking attacks. 

There are 7 different weapons that all play very differently to each other, each with 4 different weapon aspects that also play differently each other, pretty much giving players a choice of 28 playstyles ranging from a pretty traditional hack n' slash experience with the sword to attacking from a distance with a gun. After playing through half of them I can say that I've enjoyed playing almost all of them. Chaining together the different attacks feels incredibly fluid while rarely feeling overwhelming or overcomplicated.

3. RPG elements

To supplement the 28 different weapon aspects, you continually make a choice between different boons as you progress through the game, which are essentially skills / abilities that change the way your attacks work or give you new abilities.  You really can build your character however the way you want to play.

Finally, the aspect which I saw mentioned the most whether in Reddit comments to game reviews - the game does an amazing job of tying in the story to the gameplay. This wasn't too surprisingly, considering the developers Supergiant Games were behind the narrative-heavy Bastion, Transistor and Pyre, but the execution really is amazing. There is a rich set of characters from Greek mythology with an unbelievable amount of high quality voiced dialogue for every situation - the game makes you want to talk to all the characters between every run. The multitude of runs you'll undertake makes complete sense within the context of the story - not only do you get stronger over time, you also unravel more and more of the story.

I'd definitely recommend Hades even if you're not a fan of typical roguelikes, whether you enjoy higher action gameplay, a stronger focus on RPG elements, or just really good world-building and story-telling.